. ve-header "The Relation of Girlhood in Mary Cassatt's Little Girl in a Blue Arm Chair" wc:Cassat_-_Blue_Armchair_NGA.jpg 

Mary Cassatt's *[Little Girl in a Blue Arm Chair](https://www.nga.gov/collection/art-object-page.61368.html)* explores the authenticity and hilarious reality of child portraiture during the 19th century.  ==Mary Cassatt=={Q173223} prided herself on authenticity in her work, opting to show children and women as they were, even if there were imprefections.The painting features a young girl, no older than seven or eight, slumped down in a grand, upholstered armchair. She has pulled up her skirt in defiance and her lips are pursed in a pout. This is not the typical behavior of a young girl during this period, especially one from an affluent family. Cassatt deliberately chooses to offer a sincere, albeit laughable glimpse into the antics of a child who has been told to sit still for a portrait. This comedic approach to child portraiture is just one many pieces in her collection of ==oil paintings and pastel sketches.=={Q87251908} From the girl's expression and pose to her wrinkled outfit, Cassatt portrays her subject exactly as she is, a mischievous little girl who refuses to listen.[^1]
 


#Sara Holding a Cat

.ve-media wc:Cassatt_Mary_Sara_Holding_A_Cat_1908.jpg

  
Sara Holding a Cat, painted in 1908, illustrates an elegant depiction of a child holding a small furry animal for the first time. While both the kitten and Sarah remain composed, the loose brushwork still gives movement to Sarah's clothing as well as the kitten's thick, tousled fur. Cassatt's depiction of both subjects suggests that while they maintain their composure, they are both babies. They appear innocent and calm, yet Cassatt's painting techniques allude to their youth, curiosity and mischief. Sara's full lips and chubby hands further indicate her identity as a young toddler, no older than four. The kitten's large, wide eyes give it an innocent, deer-like appearance. The fur is unkempt and wild, as if it pops right off the canvas, inviting the viewer to stroke its buttery, downy texture. Sara's hair, on the other hand, remains slick and shiny to show that while she is a baby, she is expected to be lady-like and elegant in her mannerisms. Her tidy mane is reminiscent of *==The Coiffure=={Q64960365}* another work that is housed in the [Art Institute of Chicago](https://www.artic.edu/artworks/13514/the-coiffure).[^2]



#Cassatt's Impact on Impressionism through Female Representation

.ve-video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUEfAkMepDk
The video above discusses Cassatt's career as an Impressionist, allowing a glimpse into her artist portfolio. Rather than adhering to the established Impressionist canon of landscapes and flowers, Cassatt paved a different path by asserting that her intimate familial portraits are just as worthy and important in art. Several Cassatt experts weigh in on how she created a name for herself as an American Impressionist, while also staying true to her own beliefs on what deserved to have a legacy on art history, whether she intended for her work to become so famous. Cassatt's style, technique and static choice of subject matter indicated that she never planned to stray away from representing girlhood and femininity in her art. The [National Museum of Women in the Arts](https://nmwa.org/art/artists/mary-cassatt/) also celebrates her contributions to art and impressionism. She wanted these women to have at least one person who would keep their legacies aflame for centuries.

.ve-media wc:Cassatt_Mary_Mother_Combing_Child%27s_Hair_1879.jpg 

Mother Combing Child's Hair, painted in 1879, illustrates the often thankless and frustrating task of combing a young child's knotted hair. This piece is just one iteration of the works mentioned in  ==Cassatt's extensive catalogue raisonné.=={Q113993034} In the painting we can see that the mother has a firm hold on her child's chin to keep it upright to ensure she can brush through the hair thoroughly. Cassatt was certainly not the only artist to focus on intimate, familial scenes, but her contributions were impactful as a female for establishing the importance of capturing the mundane. This image ushers in the viewer's nostalgia, as we have all experienced the process of having our hair meticulously brushed, and the child in the painting is no exception. It is as if the child has begrudgingly accepted defeat and relents to the mother. Not only does this image capture the often-defiant attitude of young children, but it also encapsulates the strength and willpower of mothers who do everything in their power to ensure that their children are taken care of.[^3]


.ve-media wc:Mary_Cassatt_-_The_Boating_Party_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg

The Boating Party, painted in 1893, showcases a family boat outing between parents and their young child. It is currently on view at the [National Gallery of Art](https://www.nga.gov/collection/art-object-page.46569.html). This piece was particularly revolutionary for its progressive depiction of women in sports, as well as the expansion of sports and outdoors clothing being made accessible for women. As we can see, the mother is dressed well, in a light, patterned outfit appropriate for daytime wear. During the Victorian period and even prior, women wore full, one-piece dresses, as opposed to separate pieces like a shirt and skirt. Towards the end of the 19th century, women began to wear suits or tailor-mades. This look comprised of a custom-made outfit, featuring a long skirt and a jacket from the same fabric, along with a blouse that was worn beneath the jacket which remained open.[^4] Cassatt even wore these outfits herself as seen in her ==self portrait=={Q28796404} and Edgar Degas' painting, ==*Mary Cassatt at the Louvre*.=={Q19859005} Tailor-mades became the standard for women's dress from the end of the 19th and into the beginning of the 20th century during the Gilded Age. This look not only reflected the appearance of a more modern woman looking towards the future, but also conveyed a better sense of movement and comfort. The child in the mother's lap has reclined back and is kicking his legs to signify fussiness. These outfits allowed mothers to keep up with their mischievous children, while still remaining fashion-forward. 


.ve-media wc:Mary_Cassatt_-_The_Child's_Bath_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg

The Child’s Bath, painted in 1893, illustrates the domestic scene of a mother assisting her daughter during her bath. There are a variety of mother and child scenes like this one, many of which are on display at [The Metropolitan Museum of Art.](https://www.metmuseum.org/perspectives/mary-cassatt-modernist-mother-child)Cassatt’s use of an overhead angle, along with a bathing scene was directly influenced by Japanese wood-cut prints. Cassatt frequently traveled overseas and was one of many Impressionists inspired by wood-cut prints during the Edo period in Japan. Intimate, domestic scenes were common choices of subject matter in these prints, which goes hand in hand with Cassatt’s own signature subject matter. The child is observant of her mother washing her feet, and contrary to Cassatt’s other works, she does not have much movement. It is as if her mother had scolded her beforehand, warning her not to make a mess in the water basin. The child’s head is also down to indicate that she is listening and concentrating on her mother’s actions, while obeying her orders and maintaining her good behavior.[^5] The scene does not feel overwhelming positive or negative, indicating that the actions are happening out of the necessity of bathing. Her work reiterates a nurturing, maternal energy, while encouraging the importance of self-care. Cassatt ushered in a new standard for female portraiture, asserting that women are not rich in clothing, jewels or title. Rather, it is the memories with their families, the innocence and mischief of their childhoods and the wisdom of motherhood are some of the most powerful representations of what it means to be a woman. 

[^1]: JONES, KIMBERLY A. “Mary Cassatt’s ‘Little Girl in a Blue Armchair:’ Unraveling an Impressionist Puzzle.” Archives of American Art Journal 53, no. 1/2 (2014): 116–21. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43155545.

[^2]: Yeh, Susan Fillin. “Mary Cassatt’s Images of Women.” Art Journal 35, no. 4 (1976): 359–63. https://doi.org/10.2307/776228.

[^3]: Buettner, Stewart. “Images of Modern Motherhood in the Art of Morisot, Cassatt, Modersohn-Becker, Kollwitz.” Woman’s Art Journal 7, no. 2 (1986): 14–21. https://doi.org/10.2307/1358300.

[^4]: Eleanor Burholdt, [1893-94 – Mary Cassatt, The Boating Party](https://fashionhistory.fitnyc.edu/1893-94-cassatt-boating-party/) in *Fashion History Timeline*, July 2022.

[^5]: Sweet, Frederick A. “Paintings and Pastels by Mary Cassatt.” Art Institute of Chicago Museum Studies 2 (1967): 33–49. https://doi.org/10.2307/4108780.
